# from Concepts of Fitness and Wellness (Flynn et al.)
# URL https://med.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Health_and_Fitness/Concepts_of_Fitness_and_Wellness_(Flynn_et_al.)
# shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license

1: Healthy Behaviors and Wellness

Define the nine dimensions of wellness
Identify health problems in the United States
Identify the behaviors that promote wellness
Behavior Modification: how change occurs, barriers to change, and how to successfully
overcome barriers and make lasting lifestyle changes

1.1: Why Study Wellness?

As most college students do, you have probably set goals. Obviously, your individual goals differ from those of your fellow classmates, but everyone’s goals share one common attribute: their intention to improve individual wellbeing. However, there are as many ideas about how to do that as there are individuals. Do your goals involve making more money, achieving better health, improving your relationships? Holistic wellness involves all those aspects of life and more. This chapter explains the importance of overall wellness, which is about more than being physically and mentally healthy, free from illness and disease. In fact, the study of wellness incorporates all aspects of life. Achieving overall wellness means living actively and fully. People in this state exude confidence, optimism, and self-efficacy; they have the energy reserves to do what needs to be done today and to plan for a better tomorrow. The most effective and transformative goals are those designed to achieve the highest level of personal wellness.

1.2: Dimensions of Wellness

Wellness is a familiar term, but what is its true definition? Is it simply the absence of disease? This chapter will define all the components of holistic wellness and describe the factors that contribute to not only a person’s physical and mental health, but also their ability to develop, thrive, succeed, enjoy life, and meet challenges head on with confidence and resolve.

To achieve this type of overall wellness, a person must be healthy in nine interconnected dimensions of wellness: physical, emotional, intellectual, spiritual, social, environmental, occupational, financial, and cultural. A description of each dimension follows.

The Nine Dimensions of Wellness
Occupational Wellness
An occupationally well person enjoys the pursuit of a career which is fulfilling on a variety of levels. This person finds satisfaction and enrichment in work, while always in pursuit of opportunities to reach the next level of professional success.
Financial Wellness
Those who are financially well are fully aware of their current financial state. They set long- and short-term goals regarding finances that will allow them to reach their personal
Physical Wellness
People who are physically well actively make healthy decisions on a daily basis. They eat a nutritionally balanced diet; they try to get an adequate amount of sleep, and they visit the doctor routinely. They make a habit of exercising three to five times per week; they have the ability to identify their personal needs and are aware of their body's limitations. They maintain positive interpersonal relationships and make healthy sexual decisions that are consistent with their personal values and beliefs.
Emotional Wellness
An emotionally well person successfully expresses and manages an entire range of feelings, including anger, doubt, hope, joy, desire, fear, and many others. People who are emotionally well maintain a high level of self-esteem. They have a positive body-image and the ability to regulate their feelings. They know where to seek support and help regarding their mental health, including but not limited to, seeking professional counseling services.
Intellectual Wellness
Those who enjoy intellectual wellness engage in lifelong learning. They seek knowledge and activities that further develop their critical thinking and heighten global awareness. They engage in activities associated with the arts, philosophy, and reasoning.
Spiritual Wellness
People who can be described as spiritually well have identified a core set of beliefs that guide their decision making, and other faith- based endeavors. While firm in their spiritual beliefs, they understand others may have a distinctly different set of guiding principles. They recognize the relationship between spirituality and identity in all individuals.
Social Wellness
A socially well person builds healthy relationships based on interdependence, trust, and respect. Those who are socially well have a keen awareness of the feelings of others. They develop a network of friends and co-workers who share a common purpose, and who provide support and validation.
Environmental Wellness
An environmentally well person appreciates the external cues and stimuli that an environment can provide. People who have achieved environmental wellness recognize the limits to controlling an environment and seek to understand the role an individual plays in the environment.
Cultural Wellness
Culturally well people are aware of their own cultural background, as well as the diversity and richness present in other cultural backgrounds. Cultural wellness implies understanding, awareness and intrinsic respect for aspects of diversity. A culturally well person acknowledges and accepts the impact of these aspects of diversity on sexual orientation, religion, gender, racial and ethnic backgrounds, age groups, and disabilities.1
For more information on the nine dimensions of wellness, click on the link below:

Nine Dimensions of Wellness

A video about the nine dimensions of wellness, 

1.3: Health Problems in the United States

Americans today experience health problems that people who lived 100 years ago did not encounter. What are the factors that account for these health problems that have arisen over the past 100 years? Most health problems faced by people in the U.S. are chronic diseases that are preventable and caused by everyday choices and unhealthy lifestyles.

The link below provides more information about the leading causes of death in the United States:

Leading Causes of Death

To see a 2014 chart that shows the leading cause of death by age group, click on the link below:

Leading Cause of Death by Age Group

In the video  below, you will learn about the determinants of health as outlined by Healthy People 2020. Healthy People 2020 is a federal advisory committee comprised of non-federal, independent subject matter experts who gather data and provide advice on how to promote health and prevent disease in America:


In the meantime, the Healthy People 2020 program has updated, and been renamed Healthy People 2030  website, which contains data and technical information about the program's objectives. The video below is the announcement for the update

1.4: Behaviors That Promote Wellness

Bad habits are hard to break, but choosing to eat healthier and exercise more provides benefits that go far beyond a more ideal body weight and shape. Being physically fit can stave off many of the diseases and medical conditions discussed in the previous section, including heart disease, the number 1 killer in America. Exercise reduces stress and eases depression. Healthier employees are also more productive. Being physically fit nurtures the mind, body, and spirit and is the cornerstone of wellness. The links below provide information about behaviors within your control that contribute to an improved quality of life and increased wellness.

Six Behaviors That Contribute to Wellness

A video on lifestyle choices and their effect on wellbeing


Behaviors that Contribute to Wellness Presentation

1.5: Behavior Modification

Making permanent lifestyle changes is one of the greatest challenges a person can face. This section will explore how changes to behavior occur, the psychological barriers that hamper efforts to change, and tips for making lasting change.

How Changes in Behavior Occur
The Transtheoretical Model, also called the Stages of Change Model, was developed by James Prochaska and Carlo DiClemente in the late 1970s. Considered the dominant model for describing how behavior changes occur, it evolved through studies examining the experiences of smokers who quit on their own and comparing them with the experiences of those requiring further treatment. The goal of those studies was to understand why some people were capable of quitting on their own. It was determined that people quit smoking if they were ready to do so. Thus, the Transtheoretical Model (TTM) focuses on the decision-making of the individual and is a model of intentional change. The TTM operates on the assumption that people do not change behaviors quickly and decisively. Rather, change in behavior, especially habitual behavior, occurs continuously through a cyclical process. The TTM is not a theory but a model; different behavioral theories and constructs can be applied to various stages of the model where they may be most effective.

The TTM posits that individuals move through six stages of change: precontemplation, contemplation, preparation, action, maintenance, and termination. Termination was not part of the original model and is less often used in application of stages of change for health- related behaviors. For each stage of change, different intervention strategies are most effective at moving the person to the next stage of change and subsequently through the model to maintenance, the ideal stage of behavior.

Six Stages of Change:
Stage 1: Precontemplation
In this stage, people do not intend to take action in the foreseeable future (defined as within the next 6 months). People are often unaware that their behavior is problematic or produces negative consequences. People in this stage often underestimate the pros of changing behavior and place too much emphasis on the cons of changing behavior.
Screen Shot 2019-01-06 at 8.42.51 PM.png

Stage 2: Contemplation
In this stage, people are intending to start the healthy behavior in the foreseeable future (defined as within the next 6 months). People recognize that their behavior may be problematic, and a more thoughtful and practical consideration of the pros and cons of changing the behavior takes place, with equal emphasis placed on both. Even with this recognition, people may still feel ambivalent toward changing their behavior.
Stage 3: Preparation (Determination)
In this stage, people are ready to take action within the next 30 days. People start to take small steps toward the behavior change, and they believe changing their behavior can lead to a healthier life.
Stage 4: Action
In this stage, people have recently changed their behavior (defined as within the last 6 months) and intend to keep moving forward with that behavior change. People may exhibit this by modifying their problem behavior or acquiring new healthy behaviors.
Stage 5: Maintenance
In this stage, people have sustained their behavior change for a while (defined as more than 6 months) and intend to maintain the behavior change going forward. People in this stage work to prevent relapse to earlier stages.
Stage 6: Termination
In this stage, people have no desire to return to their unhealthy behaviors and are sure they will not relapse. Since this is rarely reached, and people tend to stay in the maintenance stage, this stage is often not considered in health promotion programs.
To progress through the stages of change, people apply cognitive, affective, and evaluative processes. Ten processes of change have been identified, with some processes being more relevant to a specific stage of change than other processes. These processes result in strategies that help people make and maintain change.

Ten Processes of Change:
Consciousness RaisingIncreasing awareness about the healthy behavior.
Dramatic Relief
Emotional arousal about the health behavior, whether positive or negative arousal.
Self-Reevaluation
Self-reappraisal to realize the healthy behavior is part of who they want to be.
Environmental Reevaluation
Social reappraisal to realize how their unhealthy behavior affects others.
Social Liberation
Environmental opportunities that exist to show society is supportive of the healthy behavior.
Self-Liberation
Commitment to change behavior based on the belief that achievement of the healthy behavior is possible.
Helping Relationships
Finding supportive relationships that encourage the desired change.
Counter-Conditioning
Substituting healthy behaviors and thoughts for unhealthy behaviors and thoughts.
Reinforcement ManagementRewarding the positive behavior and reducing the rewards that come from negative behavior.
Stimulus Control
Re-engineering the environment to have reminders and cues that support and encourage the healthy behavior and remove those that encourage the unhealthy behavior.
Limitations of the Transtheoretical Model
Limitations of the model include the following:

The theory ignores the social context in which change occurs, such as socioeconomic status and income.
The lines between the stages can be arbitrary with no set criteria of how to determine a person's stage of change. The questionnaires that have been developed to assign a person to a stage of change are not always standardized or validated.
No clear sense exists for how much time is needed for each stage, or how long a person can remain in a stage.
The model assumes that individuals make coherent and logical plans in their decision-making process when this is not always true.
The Transtheoretical Model provides suggested strategies for public health interventions to address people at various stages of the decision-making process. Using strategies suggested by TTM can result in interventions that are more effective because they are tailored for a specific group of people. In other words, the interventions involve a message or program component that has been specifically created for a target population's level of knowledge and motivation. The TTM encourages an assessment of an individual's current stage of change and accounts for relapse in people's decision- making process.2

For more information about TTM, especially as it relates to exercise, watch the video


One of the most effective tools for changing behavior is goal setting. The links below provide information on how to set goals effectively to achieve greater success in goal attainment.

Goal Setting Info from Oregon State University's Academic Success Center

Two videos that may help

1.6: Lifestyle Modification Barriers

Dr. James M. Olson, a psychology professor at the University of Western Ontario, London, has identified several psychological barriers that commonly prevent people from taking action, even when inaction poses a threat to their health. These barriers occur during 3 stages of behavior modification: admission of the problem, initial attempts to change, and long-term change as outlined below:

Barriers to Admission of the problem
The first step in lasting change is admitting a problem exists. People often fail to change behavior that poses a risk to their health because they deny a risk exists, trivialize their personal risk, feel invulnerable, make a faulty conceptualization, (i.e., they attribute early warning signs to a benign cause), or experience debilitating emotions when contemplating preventative measures.
Barriers to Initial Attempts to Change
At this stage, people acknowledge the need to change but struggle to accomplish their goals. This failure is a result of lack of knowledge, low self-efficacy (the belief in one’s own ability to succeed at change), and dysfunctional attitudes.
Barriers to long-term change
Just because a person has experienced success in changing a behavior, that doesn’t mean the change is permanent. Barriers to long-term change include cognitive and motivational drift (diminishing enthusiasm for the need to change), lack of perceived improvement, lack of social support, and lapses.
To read more about these barriers to change, including strategies for overcoming these barriers, read Dr. Olson’s entire article linked below:

Psychological Barriers to Behavior Change

A presentation on overcoming barriers to change by the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NHS) is linked below:

Overcoming Barriers to Change

Fostering Wellness in Your Life
You are once again feeling motivated to eat better, exercise more, drink less caffeine or make any number of the positive lifestyle changes you have been telling yourself you want to make. You have tried before— probably declaring another attempt as a New Year’s resolution—but without experiencing much success. Making a lifestyle change is challenging, especially when you want to transform many things at once. This time, think of those changes not as a resolution but as an evolution.

Lifestyle changes are a process that take time and require support. Once you are ready to make a change, the difficult part is committing and following through. So do your research and make a plan that will prepare you for success. Careful planning means setting small goals and taking things one step at a time.

Here are five tips from the American Psychological Association (APA) that will assist you in making lasting, positive lifestyle and behavior changes:

Make a plan that will stick.
Your plan is a map that will guide you on this journey of change. You can even think of it as an adventure. When making your plan, be specific. Want to exercise more? Detail the time of day when you can take walks and how long you will walk. Write everything down, and ask yourself if you are confident that these activities and goals are realistic for you. If not, start with smaller steps. Post your plan where you will most often see it as a reminder.
Start small.
After you've identified realistic short-term and long-term goals, break down your goals into small, manageable steps that are specifically defined and can be measured. Is your long-term goal to lose 20 pounds within the next five months? A good weekly goal would be to lose one pound a week. If you would like to eat healthier, consider as a goal for the week replacing dessert with a healthier option, like fruit or yogurt. At the end of the week, you will feel successful knowing you met your goal.
Change one behavior at a time. Unhealthy behaviors develop over the course of time, so replacing unhealthy behaviors with healthy ones requires time. Many people run into problems when they try to change too much too fast. To improve your success, focus on one goal or change at a time. As new healthy behaviors become a habit, try to add another goal that works toward the overall change you are striving for.
Involve a buddy.
Whether it be a friend, co-worker or family member, someone else on your journey will keep you motivated and accountable. Perhaps it can be someone who will go to the gym with you or someone who is also trying to stop smoking. Talk about what you are doing. Consider joining a support group. Having someone with whom to share your struggles and successes makes the work easier and the mission less intimidating.
Ask for support.
Accepting help from those who care about you and will listen strengthens your resilience and commitment. If you feel overwhelmed or unable to meet your goals on your own, consider seeking help from a psychologist. Psychologists are uniquely trained to understand the connection between the mind and body, as well as the factors that promote behavior change. Asking for help does not mean a lifetime of therapy; even just a few sessions can help you examine and set attainable goals or address the emotional issues that may be getting in your way.
Start with “Why?”
Making changes in habitual behavior requires a deep and abiding belief that change is needed. Your desire to change may be motivated by personal goals, or it may be the result of the impact your improved wellness will have on those you love. Nietzsche said, “He who has a strong enough why can bear almost any how.”

Once you have a compelling reason to change, develop a plan and commit to that plan. If you experience a moment of weakness, do not waste time on self- condemnation. Revisit your compelling reason and reaffirm your commitment to change. The health, peace, and sense of wellbeing inherent in the highest level of your own personal wellness is more than worth the effort required to change.

For more information about making permanent lifestyle changes, go to the APA website linked below:

LIfestyle Changes That Last

7.1: The Basics of Nutrition

7: Nutrition
 
7.2: Calories (Food Energy)

Nutrition can be defined as the science of the action of food, beverages, and their components in biological systems. A nutrient is a compound that provides a needed function in the body. Nutrients can be further classified based on the amount needed in the body. Macronutrients are the nutrients the body needs in larger amounts. Micronutrients are also important nutrients, but ones the body needs in smaller amounts.

Macronutrients

Carbohydrates: The word carbohydrate literally means "hydrated carbon," or carbon with water. Thus, it is no surprise that carbohydrates are made up of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. Sucrose (table sugar) is an example of a commonly consumed carbohydrate. Some dietary examples of carbohydrates are whole-wheat bread, oatmeal, rice, sugary snacks/drinks, and pasta.
Proteins: Like carbohydrates, proteins are comprised of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, but they also contain nitrogen. Several dietary sources of proteins include nuts, beans/legumes, skim milk, egg whites, and meat.
Lipids: Lipids consist of fatty acids, triglycerides, phospholipids, and sterols (cholesterol). Lipids are also composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. Some dietary sources of lipids include, oils, butter, and egg yolks.
Water: Water is made up of hydrogen and oxygen and is the only macronutrient that provides no energy.
Micronutrients

Vitamins: These compounds are essential for normal physiologic processes in the body.
Minerals: Minerals are the elements (think periodic table) that are essential for normal physiologic processes in the body.

7.2: Calories (Food Energy)
 
7.3: References and Links

Food energy is measured in kilocalories (kcals), commonly referred to as calories. Although technically incorrect, this terminology is so familiar that it will be used throughout this course. A kilocalorie is the amount of energy needed to raise 1 kilogram of water 1 degree Celsius. A food’s kilocalories are determined by putting the food into a bomb calorimeter and determining the energy output: Energy = Measurement of Heat Produced. Below is a picture of a bomb calorimeter and a link to a video showing how one is used.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YXo9B2AbH0s

The number of kilocalories per gram for each nutrient is shown below:



Nutrient

Energy (kcal/g)

Carbohydrate

4

Protein

4

Lipids

9

Water

0

Vitamins

0

Minerals

0

 

As the table above illustrates, only carbohydrates, protein, and lipids provide energy. However, there is another dietary energy source that is not a nutrient— alcohol. To emphasize, alcohol is not a nutrient, but it does provide 7 kilocalories of energy per gram.

Knowing the number of calories in each nutrient allows a person to calculate/estimate the amount of calories contained in any food consumed.

Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates have become, surprisingly, quite controversial. Some people passionately extol the merits of carbohydrates, while others berate them as nutritional assassins. However, it is important to understand that carbohydrates are a diverse group of compounds that have a multitude of effects on bodily functions. Thus, trying to make blanket statements about carbohydrates is not a good idea.

My Plate

On average, a person needs 1500 to 2000 calories per day to sustain (or carry out) daily activities. The total number of calories needed by one person is dependent on their body mass, age, height, gender, activity level, and the amount of exercise per day. If exercise is regular part of one’s day, more calories are required. As a rule, people underestimate the number of calories ingested and overestimate the amount they burn through exercise. This can lead to ingestion of too many calories per day. The accumulation of an extra 3500 calories adds one pound of weight. If an excess of 200 calories per day is ingested, one extra pound of body weight will be gained every 18 days. At that rate, an extra 20 pounds can be gained over the course of a year. Of course, this increase in calories could be offset by increased exercise. Running or jogging one mile burns almost 100 calories.

The type of food ingested also affects the body’s metabolic rate. Processing of carbohydrates requires less energy than processing of proteins. In fact, the breakdown of carbohydrates requires the least amount of energy, whereas the processing of proteins demands the most energy. In general, the amount of calories ingested and the amount of calories burned determines the overall weight. To lose weight, the number of calories burned per day must exceed the number ingested. Calories are in almost everything you ingest, so when considering calorie intake, beverages must also be considered.

To help provide guidelines regarding the types and quantities of food that should be eaten every day, the USDA has updated their food guidelines from MyPyramid to MyPlate. They have put the recommended elements of a healthy meal into the context of a place setting of food. MyPlate categorizes food into the standard six food groups: fruits, vegetables, grains, protein foods, dairy, and oils. The accompanying website gives clear recommendations regarding quantity and type of each food that you should consume each day, as well as identifying which foods belong in each category. The accompanying graphic (Figure) gives a clear visual with general recommendations for a healthy and balanced meal. The guidelines recommend to “Make half your plate fruits and vegetables.” The other half is grains and protein, with a slightly higher quantity of grains than protein. Dairy products are represented by a drink, but the quantity can be applied to other dairy products as well.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture developed food guidelines called MyPlate to help demonstrate how to maintain a healthy lifestyle. Derived from OpenStax- You can download material: http://cnx.org/contents/14fb4ad7-39a...482e3e22@8.108.

High-Fructose Corn Syrup
Food manufacturers are always searching for cheaper ways to produce their products. One extremely popular method for reducing costs is the use of high-fructose corn syrup as an alternative to sucrose. High-fructose corn syrup is approximately 50% glucose and 50% fructose, which is the same as sucrose. Nevertheless, because increased consumption of high-fructose corn syrup has coincided with increased obesity in the United States, a lot of controversy surrounds its use.

Alternative sweeteners are simply alternatives to sucrose and other mono- and disaccharides that provide sweetness.

Below are several links that provide additional information about glucose, corn syrup, and sugar.

The New York Times article linked below discusses the growing popularity of sugar compared to high fructose corn syrup: "Sugar is Back on Food Labels, This Time as a Selling Point"

The website linked below provides a wealth of information about all things sweet, such as corn syrup, sugar substitutes, sugar supplements, and granulated fructose.

Corn Syrup

The article linked below explains why the Corn Refiners Association has asked for permission to change the name of high fructose corn syrup to corn sugar and why the US Food and Drug Administration rejected that request:

"No New Name for High Fructose Corn Syrup"

Protein
Protein is another major macronutrient that, like carbohydrates, consists of small repeating units. But instead of sugars, proteins are made up of amino acids.

Proteins can be classified as either complete or incomplete. Complete proteins provide adequate amounts of all nine essential amino acids. Animal proteins, such as meat, fish, milk, and eggs, are good examples of complete proteins. Incomplete proteins do not contain adequate amounts of one or more of the essential amino acids. For example, if a protein does not provide enough of the essential amino acid leucine it would be considered incomplete. Leucine would be referred to as the limiting amino acid because there is not enough of it for the protein to be complete. Most plant foods are incomplete proteins, with a few exceptions, such as soy. The table below shows the limiting amino acids in some plant foods.

Self Magazine’s Nutrition Data website is a useful resource for determining protein quality and identifying complementary proteins. To use the site, go to www.nutritiondata.com, type the name of the food you want information on in the search bar and hit Enter. When you have selected your food from the list of possibilities, you will be given information about this food. Included in this information is the Protein Quality section. This will give you an amino acid score and a figure that illustrates which amino acid(s) is limiting. If your food is an incomplete protein, you can click "Find foods with a complementary profile." This will take you to a list of dietary choices that will provide complementary proteins for your food.

The chapter linked below is from a book published by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine and provides an exhaustive examination of the role protein and amino acids play in human health.

Protein and Amino Acids

Fat
There is neither bad nor good cholesterol, despite the common use of these descriptions in reference to LDL and HDL, respectively. Cholesterol is cholesterol. HDL and LDL contain cholesterol but are actually lipoproteins that will be described later. It is not necessary to include cholesterol in your diet because our bodies have the ability to synthesize the required amounts. The figure below gives you an idea of the cholesterol content of a variety of foods.

www.webmd.com/cholesterol- management/foods-to-avoid-for-high- cholesterol

Fiber
The simplest definition of fiber is indigestible matter. Indigestible means that it survives digestion in the small intestine and reaches the large intestine.
There are the three major fiber classifications:

Dietary fiber: This type of fiber contains both nondigestible carbohydrates and lignin and is always intrinsic and intact in plants.
Functional fiber: This type of fiber contains nondigestible carbohydrates only and can be isolated, extracted, or synthesized. Functional fiber can be from plants or animals and produces beneficial physiological effects in humans.
Total Fiber: Fiber that contains both dietary fiber and functional fiber.
Vitamins

Vitamins are organic compounds found in foods and are a necessary part of the biochemical reactions in the body. They are involved in a number of processes, including mineral and bone metabolism, and cell and tissue growth, and they act as cofactors for energy metabolism. The

B vitamins play the largest role of any vitamins in metabolism (Table and Table).

You get most of your vitamins through your diet, although some can be formed from the precursors absorbed during digestion. For example, the body synthesizes vitamin A from the β-carotene in orange vegetables like carrots and sweet potatoes. Vitamins are either fat-soluble or

water-soluble. Fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K, are absorbed through the intestinal tract with lipids in chylomicrons. Vitamin D is also synthesized in the skin through exposure to sunlight. Because they are carried in lipids, fat-soluble vitamins can accumulate in the lipids stored in the body. If excess vitamins are retained in the lipid stores in the body, hypervitaminosis can result.

Water-soluble vitamins, including the eight B vitamins and vitamin C, are absorbed with water in the gastrointestinal tract.
These vitamins move easily through bodily fluids, which are water based, so they are not stored in the body. Excess water- soluble vitamins are excreted in the urine. Therefore, hypervitaminosis of water- soluble vitamins rarely occurs, except with an excess of vitamin supplements.

Minerals
Minerals in food are inorganic compounds that work with other nutrients to ensure the body functions properly. Minerals cannot be made in the body; they come from the diet. The amount of minerals in the body is small—only 4 percent of the total body mass—and most of that consists of the minerals that the body requires in moderate quantities: potassium, sodium, calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, and chloride.

The most common minerals in the body are calcium and phosphorous, both of which are stored in the skeleton and necessary for the hardening of bones. Most minerals are ionized, and their ionic forms are used in physiological processes throughout the body. Sodium and chloride ions are electrolytes in the blood and extracellular tissues, and iron ions are critical to the formation of hemoglobin. There are additional trace minerals that are still important to the body’s functions, but their required quantities are much lower.

Like vitamins, minerals can be consumed in toxic quantities (although it is rare). A healthy diet includes most of the minerals your body requires, so supplements and processed foods can add potentially toxic levels of minerals. Table and Table provide a summary of minerals and their function in the body.

References
Lindshield, B. L. Kansas State University Human Nutrition (FNDH 400) Flexbook. goo.gl/vOAnR

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Heat-loss_calorimeter.gif

NHANES Food Frequency Questionnaire - http://riskfactor.cancer.gov/diet/FFQ.English.June0304.pdf

Framingham Heart Study History  http://www.framinghamheartstudy.org/about/history.html.

Framingham Heart Study Research Milestones - https://framinghamheartstudy.org/fhs-about/research-milestones/

The Nurses Health Study - http://www.channing.harvard.edu/nhs/?page_id=70

Health Professionals Follow-Up Study – http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/hpfs/

Links and references found at the end of the section on Protein:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:L-phenylalanine-skeletal.png

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:L-tyrosine-skeletal.png

Wardlaw GM, Hampl J. (2006) Perspectives in nutrition. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.

http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/a6/PBJ.jpg (This link doesn’t work)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Red_beans_and_rice.jpg (This links to a great picture of red beans and rice)

Schaafsma G. (2000) The protein digestibility-corrected amino acid score. J Nutr 130(7): 1865S.

8: Weight Management

By Lisa Jellum

Learning Objectives

Discuss how to manage weight through diet
Provide steps for starting a weight loss plan
Reinforce the importance of physical activity in weight management
Explain how to keep the weight off
The majority of Americans are unhappy with their current weight. Almost everyone would like to lose at least 5 pounds. A growing percentage of Americans are carrying enough excess weight to put them at risk for many diseases and even death. Few people, however, know enough about their own bodies to successfully manage their weight. Anyone planning to start a weight loss program should begin by carefully considering the following factors:

How many calories are being consumed daily?
How many calories are being expended?
How much fluids are being consumed?
How well are electrolytes being managed?

8.1: Weight Management Through Diet

Achieving one’s ideal weight can be a real challenge. But like most endeavors in life, knowledge is power. The more people know about their diet, the better equipped they will be to manage their weight. Most people focus on the number of calories consumed. However, it is also important for them to know how many macronutrients are in the foods they eat. The most effective way to do this is performing a 10-day nutritional intake analysis. These analyses are best done on consecutive days to account for the habitual ebb and flow of one’s daily food intake.

Remaining healthy during any weight loss program is paramount. Fad diets that promise quick results do not consider the effects of rapid weight loss on the body. Restricting weight loss to 1 to 2 pounds a week is a far healthier approach. Slow weight also prevents the body from burning lean muscle since the body can only burn a certain amount of fat in a week. Dieters who experience steady declines in weight are more likely to keep the weight off. The term “diet” is often synonymous with strict routines that require drastic changes in one’s eating habits. In reality, the term “diet” simply describes the intake of food.

To lose weight, dieters need a clear understanding of how weight loss occurs. One pound of fat loss is going to require a reduction in caloric intake of 3,500 calories. When viewed in terms of daily food intake, to lose a pound a week, a dieter needs to reduce their daily food intake by 500 calories a day: 3,500 calories/7 days= 500 calories per day. To successfully lose 2 pounds per week, that reduction would have to be doubled to 1,000 calories per day. Attempting to lose 2 pounds or more per week would require a calorie reduction too drastic to be maintained and too restrictive to be healthy. Thus the recommendation of combining diet and exercise is the most effective method for experiencing weight loss. Subtracting 500 calories of food intake and exerting 500 calories in exercise will provide that same 1000 calorie reduction, but in a manner that is far easier to maintain, and certainly more enjoyable.

No matter what your weight loss goal is, even a modest weight loss, such as 5 to 10 percent of your total body weight, is likely to produce health benefits, such as improvements in blood pressure, blood cholesterol, and blood sugars.1

Getting Started with Weight Loss
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends following the step-by-step guide published on its website, on this page: Healthy Weight: Losing Weight. Getting Started. The same information is also reprinted below:

Step 1: Make a commitment
Making the decision to lose weight, change your lifestyle, and become healthier is a big step to take. Start simply by making a commitment to yourself. Many people find it helpful to sign a written contract committing to the process. This contract may include things like the amount of weight you want to lose, the date you would like to lose the weight by, the dietary changes you will make to establish healthy eating habits, and a plan for getting regular physical activity.
Writing down the reasons why you want to lose weight can also help. It might be because you have a family history of heart disease, or because you want to see your kids get married, or simply because you want to feel better in your clothes. Post these reasons where they serve as a daily reminder of why you want to make this change.

Step 2: Take stock of where you are
Consider talking to your health care provider. He or she can evaluate your height, weight, and explore other weight- related risk factors you may have. Ask for a follow-up appointment to monitor changes in your weight or any related health conditions.

Keep a "food diary" for a few days, in which you write down everything you eat. By doing this, you become more aware of what you are eating and when you are eating. This awareness can help you avoid mindless eating.

Next, examine your current lifestyle. Identify things that might pose challenges to your weight loss efforts. For example, does your work or travel schedule make it difficult to get enough physical activity? Do you find yourself eating sugary foods because that is what you buy for your kids? Do your coworkers frequently bring high- calorie items, such as doughnuts, to the workplace to share with everyone? Think through things you can do to help overcome these challenges.

Finally, think about aspects of your lifestyle that can help you lose weight. For example, is there an area near your workplace where you and some coworkers can take a walk at lunchtime? Is there a place in your community, such as a YMCA, with exercise facilities for you and child care for your kids?

Step 3: Set realistic goals
Set some short-term goals and reward your efforts along the way. If your long-term goal is to lose 40 pounds and to control your high blood pressure, some short-term eating and physical activity goals might be to start eating breakfast, taking a 15-minute walk in the evenings, or having a salad or vegetable with supper.

Focus on two or three goals at a time. Great, effective goals are —

Specific
Realistic
Forgiving (less than perfect)
For example, "Exercise more" is not a specific goal. But if you say, "I will walk 15 minutes, 3 days a week for the first week," you are setting a specific and realistic goal for the first week.

Remember, small changes every day can lead to big results in the long run. Also, remember that realistic goals are achievable goals. By achieving your short- term goals day by day, you will feel good about your progress and be motivated to continue. Setting unrealistic goals, such as losing 20 pounds in 2 weeks, can leave you feeling defeated and frustrated.

Being realistic also means expecting occasional setbacks. Setbacks happen when you get away from your plan for whatever reason—maybe the holidays, longer work hours, or another life change. When setbacks happen, get back on track as quickly as possible. Also, take some time to think about what you would do differently if a similar situation happens, to prevent setbacks.

Keep in mind everyone is different—what works for someone else might not be right for you. Just because your neighbor lost weight by taking up running, doesn't mean running is the best option for you. Try a variety of activities: walking, swimming, tennis, or group exercise classes, to see what you enjoy most and can fit into your life. These activities will be easier to stick with over the long term.

Step 4: Identify resources for information and support
Find family members or friends who will support your weight loss efforts. Making lifestyle changes can feel easier when you have others you can talk to and rely on for support. You might have coworkers or neighbors with similar goals, and together you can share healthful recipes and plan group exercise. Joining a weight loss group or visiting a health care professional, such as a registered dietitian, can help.

Step 5: Continually "check in" with yourself to monitor your progress
Revisit the goals you set for yourself in Step 3, and evaluate your progress regularly. If you set a goal to walk each morning but are having trouble fitting it in before work, see if you can shift your work hours or if you can get your walk in at lunchtime or after work. Evaluate which parts of your plan are working well and which ones need tweaking. Then rewrite your goals and plan accordingly.

If you are consistently achieving a particular goal, add a new goal to help you continue on your pathway to success.

Reward yourself for your successes! Recognize when you are meeting your goals and be proud of your progress. Use non- food rewards, such as a bouquet of freshly picked flowers, a sports outing with friends, or a relaxing bath. Rewards help keep you motivated on the path to better health.2

8.2: The Importance of Physical Activity in Maintaining a Healthy Weight

On its website, the CDC explains the importance of including physical activity as part of any weight loss program. You can find information about the benefits of physical activity, recommended levels of physical activity, and the number of calories burned during common activities by clicking on this link to webpage: Healthy Weight: Physical Activity for a Health Weight. That same information is reprinted below.

Why is physical activity important?
Regular physical activity is important for good health, and it is especially important if you are trying to lose weight or to maintain a healthy weight.

When losing weight, more physical activity increases the number of calories your body uses for energy or "burns off." The burning of calories through physical activity, combined with reducing the number of calories you eat, creates a "calorie deficit" that results in weight loss.
Most weight loss occurs because of decreased caloric intake. However, evidence shows the only way to maintain weight loss is to be engaged in regular physical activity.
Most importantly, physical activity reduces risks of cardiovascular disease and diabetes beyond that produced by weight reduction alone.
Physical activity also helps to–

Maintain weight.
Reduce high blood pressure.
Reduce risk for type 2 diabetes, heart attack, stroke, and several forms of cancer.
Reduce arthritis pain and associated disability.
Reduce risk for osteoporosis and falls.
Reduce symptoms of depression and anxiety.
How much physical activity do I need?
When it comes to weight management, people vary greatly in how much physical activity they need. Here are some guidelines to follow:

To maintain your weight.
Work your way up to 150 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic activity, 75 minutes of vigorous- intensity aerobic activity, or an equivalent mix of the two each week. Strong scientific evidence shows that physical activity can help you maintain your weight over time. However, the exact amount of physical activity needed to do this is not clear since it varies greatly from person to person. It is possible that you may need to do more than the equivalent of 150 minutes of moderate-intensity activity a week to maintain your weight.

To lose weight and keep it off.
You will need a high amount of physical activity unless you also adjust your diet and reduce the amount of calories you are eating and drinking. Getting to and staying at a healthy weight requires both regular physical activity and a healthy eating plan.

What do moderate- and vigorous-intensity mean?

Moderate: While performing the physical activity, if your breathing and heart rate is noticeably faster but you can still carry on a conversation, it is probably moderately intense.

Examples include:
Walking briskly (a 15-minute mile).
Light yard work (raking/bagging leaves or using a lawn mower).
Light snow shoveling.
Actively playing with children.
Biking at a casual pace.
Vigorous: If your heart rate is increased substantially, and you are breathing too hard and fast to have a conversation, it is probably vigorously intense.

Examples include:
Jogging/running.
Swimming laps.
Rollerblading/inline skating at a brisk pace.
Cross-country skiing.
Most competitive sports (football, basketball, or soccer). • Jumping rope.3
The table below provides a list of common physical activities and the average calories expended during those activities.

 

 

Calories Used per Hour in Common Physical Activities

Moderate Physical Activity

Approximate Calories/30 Min. for a 154 lb. Person1

Approximate Calories/Hr. for a 154 lb. Person1

Hiking

185

370

Light gardening/yard work

165

330

Dancing

165

330

Golf (walking and carrying clubs)

165

330

Bicycling (<10 mph)

145

290

Walking (3.5 mph)

140

280

Weight lifting (general light workout)

110

220

Stretching

90

180

Vigorous Physical Activity

Approximate Calories/30 Min. for a 154 lb. Person1

Approximate Calories/Hr. for a 154 lb. Person1

Running/jogging (5 mph)

295

590

Bicycling (>10 mph)

295

590

Swimming (slow freestyle laps)

255

510

Aerobics

240

480

Walking (4.5 mph)

230

460

Heavy yard work (chopping wood)

220

440

Weightlifting (vigorous effort)

220

440

Basketball (vigorous)

220

440

1. Calories burned per hour will be higher for persons who weigh more than 154 lbs. (70 kg) and lower for persons who weigh less.

 

Source: Adapted from Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2005, page 16, Table 4.

8.3: Keeping the Weight Off

On its website the CDC admonishes that permanent weight loss is a result of making changes to eating habits that become a long-term part of a healthier lifestyle. You may access that section on their website by clicking Healthy Weight: Improving Your Eating Habits. It is also reprinted below.

Reflect, Replace, Reinforce: A process for improving your eating habits
Create a list of your eating habits. Keeping a food diary for a few days, in which you write down everything you eat and the time of day you ate it, will help you uncover your habits. For example, you might discover that you always seek a sweet snack to get you through the mid- afternoon energy slump. Use thisdiary to help. It's good to note how you were feeling when you decided to eat, especially if you were eating when not hungry. Were you tired? Stressed out?
Highlight the habits on your list that may be leading you to overeat. Common eating habits that can lead to weight gain are:
Eating too fast
Always cleaning your plate
Eating when not hungry
Eating while standing up (may lead to eating mindlessly or too quickly)
Always eating dessert
Skipping meals (or maybe just breakfast)
Look at the unhealthy eating habits you have highlighted. Be sure you have identified all the triggers that cause you to engage in those habits. Identify a few you would like to work on improving first. Don't forget to pat yourself on the back for the things you are doing right. Maybe you almost always eat fruit for dessert, or you drink low-fat or fat- free milk. These are good habits! Recognizing your successes will help encourage you to make more changes.
Create a list of "cues" by reviewing your food diary to become more aware of when and where you are "triggered" to eat for reasons other than hunger. Note how you are typically feeling at those times. Often an environmental "cue," or a particular emotional state, is what encourages eating for non-hunger reasons.
Common triggers for eating when not hungry are:
Opening up the cabinet and seeing your favorite snack food.
Sitting at home watching television.
Before or after a stressful meeting or situation at work.
Coming home after work and having no idea what's for dinner.
Having someone offer you a dish they made "just for you!"
Walking past a candy dish on the counter.
Sitting in the break room beside the vending machine.
Seeing a plate of doughnuts at the morning staff meeting.
Swinging through your favorite drive-through every morning.
Feeling bored or tired and thinking food might offer a pick-me-up.
Circle the "cues" on your list that you face on a daily or weekly basis. Going home for the Thanksgiving holiday may be a trigger for you to overeat, and eventually, you want to have a plan for as many eating cues as you can. But for now, focus on the ones you face more often.

Ask yourself these questions for each "cue" you have circled:
Is there anything I can do to avoid the cue or situation? This option works best for cues that don't involve others. For example, could you choose a different route to work to avoid stopping at a fast food restaurant on the way? Is there another place in the break room where you can sit so you are not next to the vending machine?

For things I cannot avoid, can I do something differently that would be healthier? Obviously, you cannot avoid all situations that trigger your unhealthy eating habits, like staff meetings at work. In these situations, evaluate your options. Could you suggest or bring healthier snacks or beverages? Could you offer to take notes to distract your attention? Could you sit farther away from the food so it won't be as easy to grab something? Could you plan ahead and eat a healthy snack before the meeting?

Replace unhealthy habits with new, healthy ones. For example, in reflecting upon your eating habits, you may realize that you eat too fast when you eat alone. So, make a commitment to share a lunch each week with a colleague, or have a neighbor over for dinner one night a week. Other strategies might include putting your fork down between bites or minimizing other distractions (i.e., watching the news during dinner) that might keep you from paying attention to how quickly—and how much— you are eating.

Here are more ideas to help you replace unhealthy habits:

Eat more slowly. If you eat too quickly, you may "clean your plate" instead of paying attention to whether your hunger is satisfied.

Eat only when you are truly hungry instead of when you are tired, anxious, or feeling an emotion besides hunger. If you find yourself eating when you are experiencing an emotion besides hunger, such as boredom or anxiety, try to find a non-eating activity to do instead. You may find a quick walk or phone call with a friend helps you feel better.

Plan meals ahead of time to ensure that you eat a healthy well-balanced meal.

Reinforce your new, healthy habits and be patient with yourself. Habits take time to develop. It doesn't happen overnight. When you do find yourself engaging in an unhealthy habit, stop as quickly as possible and ask yourself: Why do I do this? When did I start doing this? What changes do I need to make?

Be careful not to berate yourself or think that one mistake "blows" a whole day's worth of healthy habits. You can do it! It just takes one day at a time!4

8.4: Health Risks of Being Underweight

The 2003–2006 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) estimated that 1.8 percent of adults and 3.3 percent of children and adolescents in the United States are underweight. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “NCHS Health E-Stat. Prevalence of Underweight among Children and Adolescents: United States, 2003–2006.” Accessed October 8, 2011. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/underweight/underweight_children.htm. Being underweight is linked to nutritional deficiencies, especially iron-deficiency anemia, and to other problems such as delayed wound healing, hormonal abnormalities, increased susceptibility to infection, and increased risk of some chronic diseases such as osteoporosis. In children, being underweight can stunt growth. The most common underlying cause of underweight in America is inadequate nutrition. Other causes are wasting diseases, such as cancer, multiple sclerosis, tuberculosis, and eating disorders. People with wasting diseases are encouraged to seek nutritional counseling, as a healthy diet greatly affects survival and improves responses to disease treatments. Eating disorders that result in underweight affect about eight million Americans (seven million women and one million men).

Anorexia Nervosa
Anorexia nervosa, more often referred to as “anorexia,” is a psychiatric illness in which a person obsesses about their weight and about food that they eat. Anorexia results in extreme nutrient inadequacy and eventually to organ malfunction. Anorexia is relatively rare—the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) reports that 0.9 percent of females and 0.3 percent of males will have anorexia at some point in their lifetime, The National Institute of Mental Health. “Eating Disorders among Adults: Anorexia Nervosa.” Accessed October 8, 2011. http://mentalhealth.gov/statistics/1EAT_ADULT_ANX.shtml. but it is an extreme example of how an unbalanced diet can affect health. Anorexia frequently manifests during adolescence and it has the highest rate of mortality of all mental illnesses. People with anorexia consume, on average, fewer than 1,000 kilocalories per day and exercise excessively. They are in a tremendous caloric imbalance. Moreover, some may participate in binge eating, self-induced vomiting, and purging with laxatives or enemas. The very first time a person starves him- or herself may trigger the onset of anorexia. The exact causes of anorexia are not completely known, but many things contribute to its development including economic status, as it is most prevalent in high-income families. It is a genetic disease and is often passed from one generation to the next. Pregnancy complications and abnormalities in the brain, endocrine system, and immune system may all contribute to the development of this illness.

The primary signs of anorexia are fear of being overweight, extreme dieting, an unusual perception of body image, and depression. The secondary signs and symptoms of anorexia are all related to the caloric and nutrient deficiencies of the unbalanced diet and include excessive weight loss, a multitude of skin abnormalities, diarrhea, cavities and tooth loss, osteoporosis, and liver, kidney, and heart failure. There is no physical test that can be used to diagnose anorexia and distinguish it from other mental illnesses. Therefore, a correct diagnosis involves eliminating other mental illnesses, hormonal imbalances, and nervous system abnormalities. Eliminating these other possibilities involves numerous blood tests, urine tests, and x-rays. Coexisting organ malfunction is also examined. Treatment of any mental illness involves not only the individual, but also family, friends, and a psychiatric counselor. Treating anorexia also involves a dietitian, who helps to provide dietary solutions that often have to be adjusted over time. The goals of treatment for anorexia are to restore a healthy body weight and significantly reduce the behaviors associated with causing the eating disorder. Relapse to an unbalanced diet is high. Many people do recover from anorexia, however most continue to have a lower-than-normal bodyweight for the rest of their lives (see Note 11.33 "Video 11.3").

 What I Gained in Recovery from Anorexia
On a more positive note, watch this personal account of what can be gained from anorexia recovery.

 


Bulimia
Bulimia, like anorexia, is a psychiatric illness that can have severe health consequences. The NIMH reports that 0.5 percent of females and 0.1 percent of males will have bulimia at some point in their lifetime. The National Institute of Mental Health. “Eating Disorders among Adults: Bulimia Nervosa.” Accessed October 8, 2011. http://mentalhealth.gov/statistics/1EAT_ADULT_RBUL.shtml. Bulimia is characterized by episodes of eating large amounts of food followed by purging, which is accomplished by vomiting and with the use of laxatives and diuretics. Unlike people with anorexia, those with bulimia often have a normal weight, making the disorder more difficult to detect and diagnose. The disorder is characterized by signs similar to anorexia such as fear of being overweight, extreme dieting, and bouts of excessive exercise. Secondary signs and symptoms include gastric reflux, severe erosion of tooth enamel, dehydration, electrolyte imbalances, lacerations in the mouth from vomiting, and peptic ulcers. Repeated damage to the esophagus puts people with bulimia at an increased risk for esophageal cancer. The disorder is also highly genetic, linked to depression and anxiety disorders, and most commonly occurs in adolescent girls and young women. Treatment often involves antidepressant medications and, like anorexia, has better results when both the family and the individual with the disorder participate in nutritional and psychiatric counseling.

Binge-Eating Disorder
Similar to those who experience anorexia and bulimia, people who have a binge-eating disorder have lost control over their eating. Binge-eating disorder is not currently diagnosed as a distinct psychiatric illness, although there is a proposal from the American Psychiatric Association to categorize it more specifically. People with binge-eating disorder will periodically overeat to the extreme, but their loss of control over eating is not followed by fasting, purging, or compulsive exercise. As a result, people with this disorder are often overweight or obese, and their chronic disease risks are those linked to having an abnormally high body weight such as hypertension, cardiovascular disease, and Type 2 diabetes. Additionally, they often experience guilt, shame, and depression. Binge-eating disorder is commonly associated with depression and anxiety disorders. According to the NIMH, binge-eating disorder is more prevalent than anorexia and bulimia, and affects 3.5 percent of females and 2.0 percent of males at some point during their lifetime. The National Institute of Mental Health. “Eating Disorders among Adults: Binge Eating Disorder.” Accessed October 8, 2011. http://www.nimh.nih.gov/statistics/1EAT_ADULT_RB.shtml. Treatment often involves antidepressant medication as well as nutritional and psychiatric counseling.

8.5: References

CDC on benefits of losing 5 to 10 percent of body weight. https://www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/losing_weight/index.html
CDC's step by step guide. https://www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/lo...g_started.html. 
CDC's page on physical activity. https://www.cdc.gov/physicalactivity/index.html
CDC's page on improving your eating habits. https://www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/lo...ng_habits.html

11: Cancer Development

By Althea Moser

Learning Objectives

Define cancer and how cancer arises
Describe different types of cancer
Identify cancer risks and methods for cancer prevention
Assess personal cancer risk

11.1: What Is Cancer?

Cancer is the name given to a collection of related diseases in which the body’s cells begin to divide without stopping and spread into surrounding tissues.

Cancer can start almost anywhere in the human body, which is made up of trillions of cells. Normally, human cells grow and divide to form new cells as the body needs them. When cells grow old or become damaged, they die, and new cells take their place.

When cancer develops, however, this orderly process breaks down. As cells become more and more abnormal, old or damaged cells survive when they should die, and new cells form when they are not needed. These extra cells can divide without stopping and may form growths called tumors.

Many cancers form solid tumors, which are masses of tissue. Cancers of the blood, such as leukemias, generally do not form solid tumors.

Cancerous tumors are malignant, which means they can spread into, or invade, nearby tissues. In addition, as these tumors grow, some cancer cells can break off and travel to distant places in the body through the blood or the lymph system and form new tumors far from the original tumor.

Unlike malignant tumors, benign tumors do not invade nearby tissues. However, some benign tumors can be quite large. When removed, they usually do not grow back, whereas malignant tumors sometimes do. Unlike most benign tumors elsewhere in the body, benign tumors in the brain can be life threatening.

11.2: How Cancer Arises

Cancer is a genetic disease—that is, it is caused by changes to genes that control the way our cells function, especially how they grow and divide.
The name given to a collection of related diseases in which the body’s cells begin to divide without stopping and spread into surrounding tissues

Genetic changes that cause cancer can be inherited. They can also be the result of errors that occur as cells divide or environmental exposures that cause damage to DNA, the molecules inside cells that carry genetic information and pass it on from one generation to the next. Cancer- causing environmental exposures include substances, such as the chemicals in tobacco smoke; and radiation, such as ultraviolet rays from the sun.

Each person’s cancer has a unique combination of genetic changes. As the cancer continues to grow, additional changes will occur. Even within the same tumor, different cells may have different genetic changes.

In general, cancer cells have more genetic changes, such as mutations in DNA, than normal cells. Some of these changes may be the result of the cancer, rather than its cause.

11.3: Cancer Statistics

Cancer severely impacts Americans and societies throughout the world. Cancer statistics describe what happens in large groups of people and provide a picture in time of the burden of cancer on society. Statistics indicate how many people are diagnosed with and die from cancer each year, the number of people who are currently living after a cancer diagnosis, and the average age at diagnosis. They also reveal differences among groups defined by age, sex, racial/ethnic group, geographic location, and other categories.

Although statistical trends are usually not directly applicable to individual patients, they are essential for governments, policymakers, health professionals, and researchers to understand the impact of cancer on the population and to develop strategies to address the challenges that cancer poses to society. Statistical trends are also important for measuring the success of efforts to control and manage cancer.

Statistics at a Glance: The Burden of Cancer in the United States
Updates can be found at https://www.cdc.gov/cancer/uscs/index.htm

In 2016, an estimated 1,685,210 new cases of cancer will be diagnosed in the United States, and 595,690 people will die from the disease.
The most common cancers in 2016 are projected to be breast cancer, lung and bronchus cancer, prostate cancer, colon and rectum cancer, bladder cancer, melanoma of the skin, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, thyroid cancer, kidney and renal pelvis cancer, leukemia, endometrial cancer, and pancreatic cancer.
The number of new cases of cancer (cancer incidence) is 454.8 per 100,000 men and women per year (based on 2008–2012 cases).
The number of cancer deaths (cancer mortality) is 171.2 per 100,000 men and women per year (based on 2008–2012 deaths).
Cancer mortality is higher among men than women (207.9 per 100,000 men and 145.4 per 100,000 women). It is highest in African American men (261.5 per 100,000) and lowest in Asian/Pacific Islander women (91.2 per 100,000) per year (based on 2008–2012 deaths).
The number of people living beyond a cancer diagnosis reached nearly 14.5 million in 2014 and is expected to rise to almost 19 million by 2024.
Approximately 39.6 percent of men and women will be diagnosed with cancer during their lifetimes (based on 2010-2012 data).
In 2014, an estimated 15,780 children and adolescents, aged from 0 to 19, were diagnosed with cancer and 1,960 died of the disease.
National expenditures for cancer care in the United States totaled nearly $125 billion in 2010 and could reach $156 billion in 2020.
The following video explores cancer incidence and mortality through 2020:

11.4: Types of Cancer

There are more than 100 types of cancer. Types of cancer are usually named for the organs or tissues where the cancers form. For example, lung cancer starts in cells of the lung and brain cancer starts in cells of the brain. Cancers may also be described by the type of cell that formed them, such as an epithelial cell or a squamous cell.

Some types of cancer are:

Breast Cancer
The breast is made up of glands called lobules that can make milk and thin tubes called ducts that carry the milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast tissue also contains fat and connective tissue, lymph nodes, and blood vessels.

The most common type of breast cancer is ductal carcinoma, which begins in the cells of the ducts. Breast cancer can also begin in the cells of the lobules and in other tissues in the breast. Ductal carcinoma in situ is a condition in which abnormal cells are found in the lining of the ducts but have not spread outside the duct. Breast cancer that has spread from where it began in the ducts or lobules to surrounding tissue is called invasive breast cancer. In inflammatory breast cancer, the breast looks red and swollen and feels warm because the cancer cells block the lymph vessels in the skin.

In the United States, breast cancer is the second most common cancer in women after skin cancer. It can occur in both men and women, but it is rare in men. Each year there are about 100 times more new cases of breast cancer in women than in men.

Some screening tests for breast cancer include:

Clinical breast exams and regular breast self-exams
Routine examinations of the breasts by health care providers or by women themselves have not been shown to reduce deaths from breast cancer. However, if a woman or her health care provider notices a lump or other unusual change in the breast, it is important for her to get it checked out.
The following link explains how to perform a Breast Self-Exam:

Breast Self-Exam (BSE)

Mammography
This screening method for breast cancer has been shown to reduce mortality from the disease among women aged from 40 to 74, especially those aged 50 or older.
Breast MRI
This imaging test is often used for women who carry a harmful mutation in the BRCA1 gene or theBRCA2 gene; such women have a high risk of developing breast cancer, as well as increased risk for other cancers.
Cervical Cancer
The cervix is the lower, narrow end of the uterus, the organ where a fetus grows. The cervix leads from the uterus to the vagina, also known as the birth canal.

The main types of cervical cancer are squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma. Squamous cell carcinoma begins in the thin, flat cells that line the cervix. Adenocarcinoma begins in cervical cells that make mucus and other fluids.

Long-lasting infections with certain types of human papillomavirus (HPV) cause almost all cases of cervical cancer. Vaccines that protect against infection with these types of HPV can greatly reduce the risk of cervical cancer.

Screening tests:

Pap test and human papillomavirus (HPV) testing
Having a Pap test to check for abnormal cells in the cervix, or a test to check for HPV, can find cells that may become cervical cancer. These cells can be treated before cancer forms. Testing is generally recommended to begin at age 21 and to end at age 65, as long as recent results have been normal.
Colorectal Cancer
Colorectal cancer is cancer that starts in the colon or rectum. The colon and the rectum are parts of the large intestine, which is the lower part of the body’s digestive system. During digestion, food moves through the stomach and small intestine into the colon. The colon absorbs water and nutrients from the food and stores waste matter called stool. Stool moves from the colon into the rectum before it leaves the body.

Most colorectal cancers are adenocarcinomas, cancers that begin in cells that make and release mucus and other fluids. Colorectal cancer often begins as an abnormal colon growth called a polyp, which may form on the inner wall of the colon or rectum. Some polyps may develop into cancer over time. Finding and removing polyps can prevent colorectal cancer.

Colorectal cancer is the third most common type of cancer in men and women in the United States.

Screening tests:

Colonoscopy, sigmoidoscopy, and high-sensitivity fecal occult blood tests (FOBTs)
Deaths from colorectal cancer have decreased with the use of colonoscopies and fecal occult blood tests, which check for blood in the stool. Colonoscopy and sigmoidoscopy also help prevent colorectal cancer because they can detect polyps that can be removed before they develop into cancer. Expert groups generally recommend that people who are at average risk for colorectal cancer have screening beginning at age 50 through age 75.
Lung Cancer
Most lung cancer diagnoses are either non- small cell lung cancer or small cell lung cancer, depending on the way the cells look under a microscope. Non-small cell lung cancer is much more common than small cell lung cancer.

Most cases of lung cancer are caused by smoking. Lung cancer is the leading cause of death from cancer in the United States.

For most patients with lung cancer, current treatments do not cure the cancer.

Screening test:

Low-dose helical computed tomography
This test, which is used to screen for lung cancer, has been shown to reduce lung cancer deaths among heavy smokers aged from 55 to 74.
Prostate Cancer
The prostate gland makes fluid that forms part of semen. The prostate lies just below the bladder in front of the rectum. It surrounds the urethra, the tube that carries urine and semen through the penis and out of the body.

Prostate cancer is the most common cancer in men in the United States, after skin cancer, and the second leading cause of death. Prostate cancer occurs more often in African-American men than in white men. African-American men with prostate cancer are more likely to die from the disease than white men with prostate cancer.

Almost all prostate cancers are adenocarcinomas, cancers that begin in cells that make and release mucus and other fluids. Prostate cancer often has no early symptoms. Advanced prostate cancer can cause men to urinate more often or have a weaker flow of urine, but these symptoms can also be caused by benign prostate conditions.

Prostate cancer usually grows very slowly. Most men with prostate cancer are older than 65 years and do not die from the disease. Finding and treating prostate cancer before symptoms occur may not improve a patient’s health or help him live longer. Men are advised to consult their doctor about their risk of prostate cancer and whether they need screening tests.

Screening test:

PSA test
This blood test, which is often done along with a digital rectal exam, is able to detect prostate cancer at an early stage. However, expert groups no longer recommend routine PSA testing for most men because studies have shown that it has little or no effect on prostate cancer deaths and leads to overdiagnosis and overtreatment.
Skin Cancer
Skin cancer is the most common type of cancer. It usually forms in skin that has been exposed to sunlight but can occur anywhere on the body.

Skin consists of several layers. Skin cancer begins in the epidermis, or outer layer, which is made up of squamous cells, basal cells, and melanocytes.

There are several different types of skin cancer. Squamous cell and basal cell skin cancers are sometimes called nonmelanoma skin cancers.

Nonmelanoma skin cancer usually responds to treatment and rarely spreads to other parts of the body.

Melanoma is more aggressive than most other types of skin cancer. Unless melanoma is diagnosed early, it is likely to invade nearby tissues and spread to other parts of the body. The number of cases of melanoma increases each year. Only 2 percent of all skin cancers are melanoma, but it causes the most deaths from skin cancer.

Screening test:

Skin exams
Doctors often recommend that people who are at risk for skin cancer examine their skin regularly or have a health care provider do so. Such exams have not been shown to decrease the risk of dying from skin cancer, and they may lead to overtreatment. However, people should be aware of changes in their skin, such as a new mole or a change to an existing mole, and report these to their doctor promptly.
Testicular Cancer
The testicles are two glands inside the scrotum, a sac of loose skin below the penis. The testicles make sperm and the hormone testosterone.

Testicular cancer is the most common cancer in men aged from 15 to 34 years. The two main types of testicular tumors are seminoma and nonseminoma. Nonseminomas tend to grow and spread more quickly than seminomas.

The most common sign of testicular cancer is a lump or swelling in the testicle. Most testicular cancers can be cured, even if they are diagnosed at an advanced stage.

Treatment for testicular cancer can cause infertility by decreasing the amount of sperm made by the body. Men who want to have children may want to use sperm banking to store sperm before they begin treatment.

Screening test:

There is no standard or routine screening test for testicular cancer.Most often, testicular cancer is first found by men themselves, either by chance or during self-exam. Sometimes the cancer is found by a doctor during a routine physical exam.
The following video explains how to perform a testicular self-exam:


Leukemia
Leukemia is cancer of the blood cells. Most blood cells form in the bone marrow. In leukemia, immature blood cells become cancer. These cells do not work the way they should and crowd out the healthy blood cells in the bone marrow.

Different types of leukemia depend on the type of blood cell that becomes cancer. For example, lymphoblastic leukemia is a cancer of the lymphoblasts, white blood cells that fight infection. White blood cells are the most common type of blood cell to become cancer. But red blood cells, cells that carry oxygen from the lungs to the rest of the body, and platelets, cells that clot the blood, may also become cancerous.

Leukemia occurs most often in adults older than 55 years, but it is also the most common cancer in children younger than 15 years.

Leukemia can be either acute or chronic. Acute leukemia is a fast-growing cancer that usually gets worse quickly. Chronic leukemia is a slower-growing cancer that gets worse slowly over time. The treatment and prognosis for leukemia depend on the type of blood cell affected and whether the leukemia is acute or chronic.

Lymphoma
Lymphoma is cancer that begins in cells of the lymph system. The lymph system is part of the immune system, which helps the body fight infection and disease. Because lymph tissue is found all through the body, lymphoma can begin almost anywhere.

The two main types of lymphoma are Hodgkin lymphoma and non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). These can occur in both children and adults. The treatment and probability of a cure depend on the stage and the type of lymphoma.

11.5: Risk Factors for Cancer

It is usually impossible to know why one person develops cancer and another does not. But research has shown that certain risk factors may increase a person’s chances of developing cancer. There are also factors—called protective risk factors, or just protective factors—that are linked to a lower risk of cancer.

Cancer risk factors include exposure to chemicals or other substances, as well as certain behaviors. They also include circumstances that people cannot control, like age and family history. A family history of certain cancers can be a sign of a possible inherited cancer syndrome.

Most cancer risks, as well as protective factors, are initially identified in epidemiology studies. In these studies, scientists look at large groups of people and compare those who develop cancer with those who do not. These studies may show that those who develop cancer are more or less likely to behave in certain ways, or to be exposed to certain substances, than those who do not develop cancer.

On their own, such studies cannot prove that a behavior or substance causes cancer. For example, the finding could be a result of chance, or the true risk factor could be something other than the suspected risk factor. But findings of this type sometimes get attention in the media, and this can lead to false beliefs about how cancer starts and spreads.

When many studies all point to a similar association between a potential risk factor and an increased risk of cancer, and when a possible mechanism exists that could explain how the risk factor could actually cause cancer, scientists can be more confident about the relationship between the two.

Although some risk factors can be avoided, others—such as growing older—cannot. Limiting exposure to avoidable risk factors may lower a person’s risk of developing certain cancers.

Some of the most studied risk factors for cancer are listed below.

Age
Advancing age is the most important risk factor for cancer overall, and for many specific types of cancer. According to the most recent statistical data from the National Cancer Institute’s Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results program, the median age of a cancer diagnosis is 66 years. This means that half of cancer cases occur in people below this age and half in people above this age. One-quarter of new cancer cases are diagnosed in people aged from 65 to 74.

But the disease can occur at any age. For example, bone cancer is most frequently diagnosed among people under age 20, with more than one-fourth of cases occurring in this age group. And 10 percent of leukemias are diagnosed in children and adolescents under 20 years of age, whereas only 1 percent of cancer overall is diagnosed in that age group.

Alcohol
Drinking alcohol can increase a person’s risk of cancer of the mouth, throat, esophagus, larynx (voice box), liver, and breast. The more a person consumes alcohol, the higher his or her risk. The risk of cancer is much higher for those who drink alcohol and also use tobacco.

Doctors advise people who drink to do so in moderate amounts. The federal government’s Dietary Guidelines for Americans defines moderate alcohol drinking as up to one drink per day for women and up to two drinks per day for men.

It has been suggested that certain substances in red wine, such as resveratrol, have anticancer properties. However, no evidence exists that drinking red wine reduces the risk of cancer.

Cancer-Causing Substances in the Environment
Cancer is caused by changes to certain genes that alter the way our cells function. Some of these genetic changes occur naturally when DNA is replicated during the process of cell division. But others are the result of environmental exposures that damage DNA. These exposures may include substances known as carcinogens, any substance that causes cancer, such as the chemicals in tobacco smoke; and radiation, such as ultraviolet rays from the sun. People can avoid some cancer-causing exposures, such as tobacco smoke and the sun’s rays. But others are harder to avoid, especially if they are found in the air, water, and food, or the materials people use to do their jobs. Scientists are studying which exposures may cause or contribute to the development of cancer. Understanding which exposures are harmful, and where they are found, may help people avoid them.

Simply because a substance has been designated as a carcinogen, however, that does not mean that the substance will necessarily cause cancer. Many factors influence whether a person exposed to a carcinogen will develop cancer, including the amount and duration of the exposure and the individual’s genetic background.

Diet
Many studies have looked at the possibility that specific dietary components ornutrients are associated with increases or decreases in cancer risk. Studies of cancer cells in the laboratory and of animal models have sometimes provided evidence that isolated compounds may be carcinogenic, or have anticancer activity.

But with few exceptions, studies of human populations have not yet shown definitively that any dietary component causes or protects against cancer. Sometimes the results of epidemiologic studies, which compare the diets of people with and without cancer have indicated that people with and without cancer differ in their intake of a particular dietary component.

However, these results show only that the dietary component is associated with a change in cancer risk, not that the dietary component is responsible for, or causes, the change in risk. For example, participants with and without cancer could differ in other ways besides their diet, and it is possible that some other difference accounts for the variance in cancer risk.

Hormones
Estrogens, a group of female sex hormones, are known human carcinogens. Although these hormones have essential physiological roles in both females and males, they have also been associated with an increased risk of certain cancers. For instance, taking combined menopausal hormone therapy (estrogen plus progestin, which is a synthetic version of the female hormone progesterone) can increase a woman’s risk of breast cancer. Menopausal hormone therapy with estrogen alone increases the risk of endometrial cancer and is used only in women who have had a hysterectomy.

A woman who is considering menopausal hormone therapy should discuss the possible risks and benefits with her doctor.

Studies have also shown that a woman’s risk of breast cancer is related to the estrogen and progesterone made by her ovaries, known as endogenous estrogen and progesterone. Being exposed for a long time and/or to high levels of these hormones has been linked to an increased risk of breast cancer. Increases in exposure can be caused by starting menstruation early, going through menopause late, being older at first pregnancy, and never having given birth. Conversely, having given birth is a protective factor for breast cancer.

Obesity
People who are obese may have an increased risk of several types of cancer, including cancers of the breast (in women who have been through menopause), colon, rectum, esophagus, kidney, pancreas, gallbladder, and the lining of the uterus, called the endometrium.

Conversely, eating a healthy diet, being physically active, and maintaining a healthy weight may reduce the risk of some cancers. These healthy behaviors also lessen the risk of other illnesses, such as heart disease, type II diabetes, and high blood pressure.

Sunlight
The sun, sunlamps, and tanning booths all give off ultraviolet (UV) radiation. Exposure to UV radiation causes early aging of the skin and skin damage that can lead to skin cancer.

People of all ages should limit the amount of time they spend in the sun, especially between mid-morning and late afternoon, and avoid other sources of UV radiation, such as tanning beds. It is important to keep in mind that UV radiation is reflected by sand, water, snow, and ice and can go through windshields and windows.

The best way to lessen UV damage when spending time in the sun is to wear long sleeves, long pants, a hat with a wide brim, and sunglasses with lenses that absorb UV radiation. Sunscreen with a sun protection factor (SPF) of at least 15 may help prevent skin cancer but does not work as well as staying out of the sun and wearing protective clothing.

Tobacco
Tobacco use is a leading cause of cancer and of death from cancer. People who use tobacco products, or are regularly exposed to environmental tobacco smoke (called secondhand smoke), have an increased risk of cancer because tobacco products and secondhand smoke have many chemicals that damage DNA.

Tobacco use causes many types of cancer, including cancer of the lung, larynx, mouth, esophagus, throat, bladder, kidney, liver, stomach, pancreas, colon and rectum, and cervix, as well as acute myeloid leukemia. People who use smokeless tobacco, such as snuff or chewing tobacco, have increased risks of cancers of the mouth, esophagus, and pancreas.

No level of tobacco use is safe. People who use any type of tobacco product are strongly urged to quit. People who quit smoking, regardless of their age, have substantial gains in life expectancy compared with those who continue to smoke. Also, quitting smoking at the time of a cancer diagnosis reduces the risk of death.

Cancer Prevention Overview
Cancer prevention is action taken to lower the chance of getting cancer. In addition to the physical problems and emotional distress caused by cancer, the high costs of care are also a burden to patients, their families, and to the public. Preventative measures can lower the number of new cases and cancer deaths, and reduce the burden of cancer on society.

Scientists are studying ways to prevent cancer, including the following:

Avoiding or controlling factors known to cause cancer
Improving diet and adopting a healthier lifestyle
Finding precancerous conditions early
Incorporating chemoprevention: the use of medicines that treat precancerous conditions or prevent cancer from starting
Cancer Treatment

Patients and their doctors must choose from a plethora of cancer treatments. The types of treatment a patient receives depend on the type of cancer a person has and how advanced it is. Some people with cancer will have only one treatment. But most people have a combination of treatments, such as surgery with chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy. They may also undergo immunotherapy, targeted therapy, or hormone therapy.

Clinical trials are also an option for some patients. Clinical trials are research studies that involve people. Understanding what they are and how they work can help patients decide if taking part in a trial is a good option.

When seeking treatment for cancer, patients have a lot to learn and consider. It is normal for them to feel overwhelmed and confused. Talking with their doctor and learning all they can about their treatment options, including clinical trials, can help them make a decision they feel good about.

11.6: Assessing Your Personal Risk of Cancer

Complete the following Lab to assess your personal risk of cancer, and submit it per your instructor’s directions:

Assess Your Risk of Cancer

Complete the Lab to assess your personal risk of cancer, and submit it per your instructor’s directions